---
title: "Dan Schult"
about: "Dan Schult from NetworkX talks about how he joined the Scientific Python community and help it grow through his work at NetworkX. "
youtube_id: mmrFrakXuJc
---

Hello everyone, I'm Juanita. Welcome to the Scientific Python interviews. Today we have Dan Schult, so Dan is a professor of mathematics at Colgate university in upstate New York he co-founded NetworkX, the Scientific Python package for network science and he's currently one of its maintainers. He has been part of the Scientific Python community for a long time helping grow the NetworkX community. So thanks for being here Dan can you please introduce yourself?

Yeah so I'm Dan Schult, I enjoy working with software I think that started very young and it it always kind of attracted me to go towards the side of the programming or the software where you could change and adapt things, and I think that sort of instilled in me an open source view of the world where yeah I want to use a computer I want to be able to do something with the computer but I don't want to just be presented with what's there. I'd like to see what I can do with it to tweak it and make it sort of more fun so that's where I'm coming from. Yes I'm a professor of mathematics at Colgate university it's a bitter cold winter here right now and it's a wonderful place to be so if you're ever in Hamilton, New York it's about five hours north of New York city drop me a line and we'll we'll go out or something.

Thank you Dan, so I want to ask you what drove you to contribute to open source in the first place and what was your first open source contribution?
Right, good so I was a tenure stream faculty member that's the way that the professor world works right, you go for your first six years and you're on the tenure track and so I did a lot of work with spreading of fire. I was studying combustion and so you want to see how that spreads through the wood, or through the forest, or through the electrical wires in the space station or whatever whatever it is. When I got tenure I started looking around this as an undergraduate institution Colgate University and so sometimes they don't get to take the partial differential equations course until right at the end and that's what combustion is all about. But also this was near a pretty big breakthrough in the way that networks were studied and so the idea of spreading diseases and spreading ideas spreading memes those kinds of things were just starting to be able to be explored in new kind of ways. I saw a really neat talk by Max Hyman from Los Alamos National Lab at one of the national meetings, and it was basically they were simulating a a bio attack shortly after 911 as well, so they were interested in this kind of thing: a bio attack of a disease released in Portland, Oregon and they had every single person in the city and you know just fictional and then they were simulating where they would go each day and how long they would be in this building or that building or this room or that room. It was a really impressive thing to look at spreading but not through wood or through space but over a network; so you had this contact network of people infecting other people, so I decided to jump on that and I went out to Los Alamos for my post 10 years sabbatical looking to retrain a little bit get into spreading over over a discrete system instead of a continuous meaning that you can you can infect somebody very far away from you if you travel there and then come back and now there's a site there that can start spreading as well.

I worked with two people there Eric Hogberg and Peter Sport pretty intensely and that's where I started to get into the publicly available open source software. As I said before, I'd always been interested in tweaking software and making that available to other people you would post it on your web page or send it out in an email list but this was my first time where the official channels for releasing the software were fully developed at that point and Eric and Peter were quite familiar with them and so that helped me a lot to get involved. It was I was diving into the to the code to see what worked and what could be done better and I was relying on them for a lot of the style and how do you make this usable by other people and that sort of thing and I kind of got hooked and, so I started doing more of that stuff after that point so it was 2004. Spring in 2004 was when I probably, it was about six months worth of time that I sort of more intensely got into software design and development for exploring spreading over these networks.

Wow 2004. that's great. That's awesome. It sounds like your sabbatical was very productive. Yes definitely was. So how did you become a maintainer like after all that and what do you think was the greatest challenge?

Good so during that time well early on in that time I asked Eric if there was some tool that he knew to play with these networks where you have nodes individual nodes we call them and we draw them as dots and then we connect them with the lines and that makes a network it's often called graph theory in the mathematical world but as soon as you put a number on that edge between the two nodes that says for example how likely is it to spread across this edge as opposed to another one you can think of disease spread right is it a 50 chance or is it a 10 chance. Then you get to what we call a network instead of a graph and the network science was really ballooning at that time so I wanted to try to play with these spreading processes a little bit and Eric had this code that he played with and he's invited me to take a look at it and see what that was like. By the end of the sabbatical we had a pretty good, pretty robust system that other people would find useful and Eric and Peter approached me about joining them to release that to the open source community and to maintain it at that time from that time forward. It was pretty clear that Eric was the leader and then and sort of the spearhead that was making this move forward but Peter and I were available to help and that was a really nice way in. So that's how I became a maintainer, was that I was working with the code, providing fixes you know, making making suggestions as to what might be easier and they moved that to a larger scale. It no longer had to happen in a room where we would meet and talk about code, it could happen over across the country across the world through the features that are available well they've been developed a lot since then but at the time they were available and so that was a an important thing too. I think that's the greatest challenge is to stay connected, to stay involved with that community even though they are physically distant and of course more and more we're doing more and more of that in lots of different realms, not just open source software but I think that open source software was one of the areas that sort of pushed that envelope early on to try to be able to work remotely; maintain a piece of software and not meet in a room that's that's a pretty cool thing so that. Early on those those were the challenges is to stay connected.

And I think that's getting better through time I guess.
Yes yes much easier.
So it seems that you're still leading the NetworkX project so I wonder how do you do to do that and also teach at the mathematics department at Colgate University?

Right so I have a full-time job, the work with NetworkX is a hobby in some sense. So, right being a professor, part of my job is just to keep current on the research, what's being published, what's being talked about, and some of that is the software that's being used so it is part of my job to be looking at the software and playing with it, I'm gonna call it playing with it because that's the way I do it, figuring out what works well what doesn't work well. It also became, some of my interest in teaching came through in terms of rewriting the documentation, making it user friendly, making it more academic having lots of citations to papers that describe the algorithms that was a focus of Eric's as well, so it worked well with with my interests. We were sort of building a book only it wasn't a book it was a piece of software but of course this was a hobby too, so I would spend my time teaching and there were months at a time where I was not able to really engage with the NetworkX stuff. And you can kind of see it if you look through the history that oh yep okay so he's coming back to that project again and he forgot all the things that he did before so he has to relearn them. That interruption, so to speak was ameliorated somewhat by Eric who I don't know where he got the time because he had a full-time job too, but he was able to really fill out the package, put in important features that he knew people wanted to use and also to be available to give talks to answer the emails. I was also answering anytime somebody would have an issue they could enter it into the webpage and we could respond to it there but he was instrumental in making that sort of grow and this was during the time of my career when I was really pushing to become established. And so I didn't have as much time to venture forth into the open source and maintaining NetworkX but I was active and I tried to stay active even though there were, you know, periods of months at a time when I really wasn't able to do it, I would come back to it. And part of that was because again the community it was you know it's hard to stay together but, on the other hand there was a trust there and we knew that everybody was putting in what they could put in and making improvements and I think everybody in that crew really trusted that the other people were in good faith trying to improve the system. Also you know year five to ten or so after the release of NetworkX it became clear that this was really helping a lot of people, you know. When my wife goes to a conference and she's talking to people and they say wait your husband wrote NetworkX I use that all the time. That sort of thing makes you realize that this has far implications far beyond what you intended when you first started and that's really exciting to know that the work that you're doing is impacting people. I'm right I have papers and people read those papers that influences them but the scale is very different with software if you can do something that makes it a little bit easier to use the software that's a big change big help and if you can write a new algorithm that's even better big change.

Yeah it sounds like your hobby helps a lot of people nowadays. So you were talking about how the community is very trustful so I wanted to know what do you think you enjoy the most about working with the Scientific Python community?

Yeah, so there are two aspects of that: One I'm a scientist I mean I'm in a mathematics department and some people wonder whether math is science or not but my perspective on mathematics has always been through a scientific lens and so this is the community within the Python world certainly where the tools are being built to learn about the world to explore the world using a computer. Python is... I had not been exposed to Python before I went to Los Alamos, I should say I knew of it I had tried to use it a few times but I had not actually spent much time using it. Python is a wonderful language and I think that was part of the draw early on and so there's these people that are doing science that are using Python because it's easy, you don't have to worry about the details of memory allocation and things like that and you can write scripts as opposed to formulating all of the data structure and everything that you would need to write it in C, and you can actually see that if you're going to be doing a program and running it lots and lots of times and it's going to have to be really fast then you should write it in C no doubt about it. But if it's the people time that's important which is usually the case in science, because you don't really know what question you want to ask yet so you want to try this, try that, try the other thing and that is where Python really shines. So the science and Python kind of went together you're saving people time by using Python as opposed to computer time, which is, that's where you go and write it in C or Fortran or some other language like that. The Scientific Python community was pretty clearly it developed, it sort of formed I would say around what is now called NumPy, numeric Python and the array system to store matrices to store data in an efficient way and have algorithms that could go through that data so it was the right place for me to plug in. But what kept me there is that the community is an amazing community right, we've got really good people who are interested in furthering the scientific knowledge, but also furthering the use of user-friendly scientifically relevant software and it's a community that is really built on being nice to each other. I mean I don't know we're all kind of I think everybody even the ones that are paid to do this are being paid less than they would somewhere else, everybody is sacrificing somewhat to be in this community. And we all know that and everybody respects that everybody else is trying, there's no I'm sure there's politics somewhere but I haven't seen much of it. It's a really good community to work at and that's what I enjoy most about it; it's a place, it's a safe place where I can go and I can do what I think is right and not worry about pissing somebody else off and I can listen to what they say if they don't agree with what I want yeah.
I really love the sharing knowledge in the community like you said it you just started a project that you thought it was useful for you and you share it and then it ended up being useful for a lot of people and I think that's really really nice of the community. So where would you like this community to go in the future like where do you see it?

So Scientific Python is, well it's it has in the last 10 years gone through a vast expansion but I think in the last, I don't know, three to five years there's been a realization that there are helpful ways that we can share tools and bring the tools together; and that's I think the sort of the nexus of a movement recently to form a community that is focused, not just on one package or another package, but on the interfaces between them to try to bring that community together to make the software not something that you download, one like NetworkX, you download NetworkX and just use that. Instead you download a scientific piece of software that's larger but lets you do all the different packages and interface between them nicely and that distinction drops the barrier for people to use one piece of software and then move to another one and move back and forth between them. That's where I think the Scientific Python community is moving and where I would choose for it to go, but I'm just a very small part of that. But that's where I think there is benefit right, the biggest bang for the buck is to take these pieces that we've got and make them work together in they already do but in better ways.

Yeah totally, I totally agree. So what do you think a new NetworkX contributor should expect when they submit their first PR?

Right so the whole PR and GitHub thing is a learning experience and typically when you get to doing your first PR you've played with it before you maybe set up a repository yourself and done a pull request to your own repository to figure that out and make mistake, a lot of mistakes before doing that, make a lot of mistakes and then go try to read this page about how to do it, and try that and but eventually you get something and it doesn't have to be fantastic code or anything. It might just be fixing a spelling error in the documentation, or rewriting some paragraph, adding a new paragraph that describes it in a different way, or different application that you happen to know about. So typically you get that it takes a little while to get to that first PR, but when you submit your first PR you will get it all ready and you forked the repository to your account and then you update that and then you press the button to submit the PR to the next place and nothing happens. And it's like wait a minute did that really work, I hit the button and so then you go and you look, oh yeah look it's there and so you can look at it and see what it looks like and see what other people will see when they see it. You might expect right away within five minutes that you'll get somebody else posting back to it it, usually takes longer than that but I would say with NetworkX it's usually a 24 to 48 hour turnaround at most so you'll get something from someone saying "thanks this looks reasonable", if it's a documentation improvement it might be as quick as "this looks great, do you have any other changes that you expect to make", if it's more involved you'll probably get some sort of a question like "wow this is a really neat idea, we don't have something like that yet, do you have any links to papers or other web pages that tell us more about why that's an important topic?" and so then you would respond to that. If it's a change in code that just speeds things up right you look through the code you notice hey this line could be changed and it would speed things up, then we would probably get a response something like that "looks like it makes sense to be speeding up, do you have any idea how much it speeds it up?" and the back and forth then starts. So then you respond you reply to that reply and the NetworkX folks will sort of walk you through what else needs to happen, like if you put in a new module but you forgot to put the link in or didn't know to put the link into the documentation, we'll give you a tip for how to do that, we'll point you to the instructions for how to update the documentation or to see the documentation before it's been merged with the main branch, so that your your pull request, your PR you can check out what the documentation looks like just with that PR added to what is already in NetworkX. So those kind of tips and tidbits are helpful if you don't know about something, like you don't know how to time how long it takes how much was the speed up, then somebody will we'll give you a short flip of code, and you can take that and run with it and expand it or make it work for your application. At some point it'll start if it's a more involved piece of code it may get bogged down don't get discouraged by that you know; if you don't hear for a week or two ping us right put something in any progress on this that kind of thing can help. We've got things taking our time from stuff beyond NetworkX and it's good to have a reminder to go back to it and we're pleased to do so it's not that you are bothering us or anything like that. And sometimes we'll just say I can't get to it to this week but I hope to get to it two weeks from now or something like that. That first PR then once we have two people looking at it and saying yes this looks good approving it, that's the official word approving it, then it'll get merged which means that we hit a big green button on our screen and the code gets put on top of the code that's in NetworkX. So that's the wonderful thing about this merging process is that there's a record of everything that's happened and it just interleaves the new code with the old and then that's ready for release. So when the next release cycle comes that will become part of the stable released version of NetworkX and before that it's available for people, a lot of people just use the code straight from GitHub and not not based on the release. Those are the set typically the more technically savvy who are willing to put up with something that doesn't quite work right and then provide a fix for it but the code is there and people do use it before it's released so when you finish partying for having the PR merged then you can start thinking wow that actually wasn't so bad let me try that again in a different way.

So anyone basically can do a PR.

Yes there's the only hurdle to it is learning enough about the GitHub process where you can go in and make a copy of the repository change something put it up onto GitHub and then press that button that says make a PR put in some text saying what it's about and then hit return.

I really like that about open source that you can just get direct contact with developers. Okay so one last question for you, I would like to ask you if you can give some advice to someone who wants to contribute to the Scientific Python ecosystem. So you already told us how PRs work so what advice would you give to someone who's like "I want to do my first PR"?

Yep if you want to do a first PR, a great way to do that is to look through documentation. There's almost always something there that could be improved and it's easy for the people that are the maintainers to look at what you did make suggestions or expansions, it's a relatively easy PR to make at that point you then you go through the process of making it. But in that I would say you shouldn't just pick one because you want to make a PR maybe I'll pull back on that, what you should really do is find something that is fun to do with this code and work with it, and find out how it works and what makes sense, what doesn't make sense and as you go keep track in the back of your head oh "that was relatively difficult, I should probably, I could probably make that a little bit easier to understand" and you know jot it down or change some, you know, keep a version of your code and change something as it goes. As you are working on your stuff, that's where you're gonna make the best, I think, changes for other people because they're gonna try to do the same sort of things that you're gonna do and if you can make it easier for them then you've contributed to their work as well as your work. It also keeps you focused on something fun, so yeah, you know, choose something that you want and that you like; make it a hobby right, it's um we're all we're all giving and but we're giving in ways that make us happy that you know none of this should be drudgery work it should be something that you're interested in that you are doing.

Yeah I think it could be really fun to work on a project that you're really interested. Okay I think that was it for today thank you very much for being here today and for helping us understand a bit more about how you started on this journey of Scientific Python community and thanks all for watching and welcome to the Scientific Python community!
Great thank you.
